How did the history of the Americas
begin? Throughout human history, few
regions evoke as much wonder and mystery
as the Americas. As one of the last
major land masses to be settled by
humans, the Americas became home to
diverse cultures and civilizations. Join
us in this video to explore the origins
of the first humans to reach these
abundant continents at the edge of the
known world. From their treacherous
journeys across the icy wastelands of
Siberia and Canada to encountering
formidable Ice Age predators such as
saber-tooth cats and giant short-faced
bears.
The Ice Age immigrants.
Humans have wandered the planet for
hundreds of thousands of years following
the seasons in search of sustenance and
warmth hoping to prolong the existence
of their species.
Among all migration stories, the
settlement of the Americas remains one
of the most debated and intriguing
subjects in archaeology.
If we look to Africa and Europe,
anthropologists propose humans ventured
throughout the landscape as early as
300,000 years ago pointing to the
discovery of the Jebel Irhoud remains in
Morocco as credible evidence.
But when we turn our attention back to
the Americas, the archaeological record
appears far younger in essence and to
many, the idea of when humans first
arrived on the continent continues to
invoke a wide range of opinions.
To truly understand the lengthy history
of the Americas, we must first venture
back to the Pleistocene epoch. This
geological epoch began around 2.6
million years ago and lasted until
approximately 11,700
years ago. It's characterized by long
cycles of glacial and interglacial
periods, and the last of these great ice
ages is known as the last glacial
maximum.
This period is of particular interest to
researchers and archaeologists over the
past century in their quest to find the
first Americans. The Last Glacial
Maximum, or LGM for short, began as
early as 25,000 years ago and lasted for
several thousand years. Widely
considered to be the coldest part of the
last ice age, this era saw massive ice
sheets covering much of North America,
dramatically shaping the landscape and
migration patterns. The Laurentide ice
sheet covered most of Canada and the
northern United States under ice layers
up to 2.5 miles thick. Regions such as
British Columbia, Alaska, Montana, New
England, and parts of Idaho and
Washington lay frozen beneath this vast
glacial expanse.
South America didn't escape the wrath of
the Pleistocene, experiencing its fair
share of these freezing conditions. The
Patagonian ice sheet covered the
southern third of Chile and parts of
Argentina, and almost wholly submerged
the Patagonian Andes.
The extensive sheet was about 2,000 km
long from north to south. Distinct
animals roamed the Americas during this
bygone era, ranging from saber-toothed
cats to woolly mammoths and even
enormous ground sloths that make their
modern tree-hugging cousins appear as
nothing more than babies.
At the end of the Last Glacial Maximum,
Earth experienced a drastic drop in sea
levels, exposing large sections of the
world's continental shelves. This
allowed not only land animals, but also
humans to cross the so-called Bering
Land Bridge that connected North America
and Siberia. This narrow opening led the
first humans to journey from Eurasia to
the Americas, becoming the seeds that
would soon blossom into civilization in
the West. For decades, scholars widely
accepted that humans first arrived in
North America around 16,000 years ago
via the Bering Land Bridge. However, new
discoveries suggest that human migration
to the Americas may have begun much
earlier, possibly as early as 23,000 or
even 30,000 years ago.
Though these claims remain debated.
During this time, the Bering Strait was
flooded as ice sheets began melting in
the Northern Hemisphere, submerging it
beneath the freezing waters of the
Atlantic Ocean.
The exact date when humans reached the
Americas using this primordial bridge
has been widely debated over the past
few decades with some suggesting
evidence points towards humans migrating
to the continent as early as 23,000
years ago.
While the Bering Land Bridge theory
remains widely supported by
archaeologists and geneticists, recent
discoveries have suggested that earlier
human presence in the Americas may have
also occurred through alternative
migration routes.
The exact timing and pathways of these
migrations remain areas of active
research and debate. A study led by
Oxford University Professor Tom Higham
proposed that evidence from multiple
sites suggest human presence in the
Americas may date back as far as 30,000
years ago.
While this remains debated, it has
encouraged further research into the
complexities of early human migration.
In their report, they meticulously
detailed investigations conducted at
over 40 sites using cutting-edge
scientific techniques and went on to
drop a bombshell by proposing these
ancient migrants didn't cross the Bering
Land Bridge as it was still impenetrable
at this time.
Instead, they claim the oldest Eurasians
to reach America came by way of boats.
Dr. Lorena Becerra Valdivia, who worked
alongside Higham, shed light on their
discovery and its implications.
Stating, "The peopling of the Americas
was a complex and dynamic process. What
is clear is that humans were present in
the continent well before previously
accepted dates.
But it was only around 14,700
years ago that these people became more
highly visible in the archaeological
record,
likely due to an increase in
population."
Despite the magnitude of the discovery
and what it would mean for the timeline
of humans in the Americas, numerous
scientists were quick to push back
against the new theories. Many argued
that the findings of the Oxford-based
researchers are inconclusive and that
more work is required before they can
say with certainty when humans arrived
in the Americas.
But this hasn't been the only
fascinating discovery of its kind in
recent decades. Another site that aims
to push back the human presence on the
continents is located several thousands
of kilometers to the south at
Chiquihuite Cave, a high-altitude rock
shelter in central Mexico. Here,
researchers discovered a rich cache of
items, including 2,000 stone tools,
suggesting the cave was inhabited by
people around 33,000 years ago.
Another debated site is the Topper
excavation site in South Carolina, where
archaeologist Dr. Albert Goodyear has
suggested that some artifacts may date
as far back as 50,000 years.
However, this claim remains
controversial, with many scholars
questioning whether the artifacts show
clear evidence of human modification.
The dating of these artifacts has been
met with some criticism, with some
suggesting the timeline proposed is over
exaggerated.
But as archaeologists continue to study
sites of interest, researchers are
slowly being forced to reckon with the
idea that humans may have arrived in the
Americas thousands of years before
initially thought.
As these theories are relatively new,
critics and skeptics propose a vast deal
more evidence is required before we can
get a definite answer on when the
earliest humans settled in America.
Nonetheless, archaeologists and
anthropologists generally agree on one
thing. By the end of the last glacial
maximum around 11,700
years ago, the populating of the
continents was well underway, and the
ancestors of today's Native Americans
had begun to establish thriving cultures
that would [music] spread across the
entirety of the Americas.
The Clovis culture. In the wintery
shadows that engulfed the last glacial
maximum, a group of enigmatic Eurasians
arrived in the Americas that would go on
to change the course of history.
These nomadic hunters, known as the
Clovis people, ventured across the
Bering Land Bridge, facing unimaginable
obstacles on their way. From fighting
against a vicious and tall extinct
species of mammal known as short-faced
bears to enduring the crippling weather
that likely left many of their ancestors
freezing to death. They persevered the
long journey and made it to the promised
land beyond the ice.
The Clovis culture was long considered
the first human group to settle the
Americas. However, new archaeological
discoveries suggest that earlier
populations may have arrived before
them, challenging the long-held Clovis
first theory. Nonetheless, they remain
the oldest ancient American group about
which we know a considerable deal. The
Clovis themselves were characterized by
a distinct type of stone tool utilized
in hunting.
The first signs of their presence in the
Americas were discovered by construction
workers who had unearthed a cache of
large animal bones in eastern New Mexico
in 1932.
The news eventually reached Edgar B.
Howard, who at the time was working as
an archaeology research associate at the
University of Pennsylvania Museum.
Almost immediately, he dropped what he
was doing and rushed to Clovis, New
Mexico to persuade the landowners to let
him excavate the site.
By the following summer, he had
uncovered what he called at the time
matted masses of bones of mammoths and
an unprecedented number of slender spear
points made of various stones known to
modern archaeologists as Clovis points.
The Clovis parts are distinctive,
meticulously chipped from obsidian,
jasper, chert, and other fine brittle
stones. Extending from the base towards
the tips are shallow concave grooves
called flutes that may have helped the
points be inserted into spear shafts.
Generally, the stone implements are
around 4 in long and a third of an inch
thick. Upon physical inspection,
archaeologists denounced they were sleek
and beautifully made by the hands of
experienced craftsmen.
After discovering Clovis points in New
Mexico, Howard and others began to look
for traces of similar stone tools in
artifacts found in Siberia, hoping to
discover the origin of the first
Americans.
However, they came up empty-handed,
suggesting that the Clovis points were
an American invention and perhaps the
very first one of its kind.
To date, over 10,000 of the Clovis
points have been discovered at more than
1,500
locations throughout most of North
America.
They have unearthed across a broad swath
of land stretching from Florida to
Montana and Pennsylvania to Washington.
Yet, despite their overwhelming
presence, archaeologists have suggested
the Clovis culture lasted for just a few
centuries.
They appear to have materialized
suddenly, by archaeological standards,
and spread fast before disappearing from
the archaeological record. The oldest
securely dated points discovered in
Texas are around 13,500
years old. Most of their distinctive
hunting implements were found wedged
between the ribs of large extinct
mammals, including mastodons and
mammoths.
No doubt, when these people arrived in
the Americas, they followed in the
footsteps of large animals migrating to
new lands. These early Eurasians hunted
woolly mammoths and steppe bison, and
eventually established a culture that
would go on to spread across the two
American continents. In the past,
researchers proposed the Clovis people
had a particular reverence for praying
on the largest mammals that roamed the
Americas. But in reality, the culture
mainly depended on foraging for plants,
hunting much smaller mammals, and likely
making use of the bountiful rivers to
catch fish.
Their Stone Age tool belt consisted of
scrapers, blades, drills, and needles,
all of which they used to lead the way
for culture in the Americas to blossom.
The clear presence of the Clovis in
North America is undeniable,
being linked across the continent by the
way of their unique stone points.
However, a question that perplexed many
researchers for decades was the extent
to which the Clovis people had spread
into South America. Some researchers
attempted to use the discovery of
fishtail stone points as clear evidence,
suggesting they were remarkably similar
to those produced by the Clovis.
Back in 2018, this dilemma was finally
solved by Howard Hughes Medical
Investigator David Reich and his
colleague, who published a report on
November 8th, 2018 in the prestigious
journal Cell.
As a renowned team of researchers who
garnered international fame for their
work showcasing that Neanderthals
interbred with our ancestors, they
compared ancient peoples' genes from
sites in Central and South America to
genes from a Clovis-linked individual
who lived in today's Montana between
12,700
and 12,900
years ago.
They discovered a clear match between
the Montana individual's genes and the
three oldest genetic samples in the new
study,
which came from Chile, Brazil, and
Belize.
Their groundbreaking study provided the
archaeological work with credible
evidence to suggest that migrations of
people who spread the Clovis culture in
North America did in fact have an effect
farther south and likely were the
progenitors of the so-called fishtail
culture. Though widespread, the Clovis
culture lasted only a few centuries
before fading from the archaeological
record. Rather than disappearing
entirely, it is likely that Clovis
groups adapted to changing environments
evolving into new regional cultures. As
Clovis people settled into different
ecological zones, the culture split into
distinctive groups, each adapting to its
own individual environment. [music] In
reality, the end of Clovis marked the
beginning of the enormous social,
cultural, and linguistic diversity, one
that would pave the way for civilization
in the Americas over the next 10,000
years. Of the brief florescence of
Clovis, only their unmistakable stone
tools remained. These were the last
physical traces of America's first and
most extensive cultural imperium.
The cultures that rose from the ashes of
the Clovis people, as the sun sets on
the Pleistocene, a new era emerges from
beneath the tightly packed layers of ice
that once covered the continent.
Armed with innovative stone tools and
backed by fire, ancient humans embarked
on a journey that would soon take them
to all corners of the American
continent, ushering in a period of
evolution that would in time define this
part of the world. The Clovis people
vanished from the archaeological record
around 12,900
years ago.
For some time, researchers surmised this
extensive group of pioneers may have
succumbed to drastic changes in the
climate leading to their eventual
extinction. However, it has become
apparent that this wasn't the case.
Instead, they simply evolved with the
times and slowly transitioned into
several other distinct cultures, many of
which would go on to have an everlasting
effect on the landscape. You see, at the
same time as the disappearance of Clovis
points, the American continents were
going through a transition of their own.
As the last glacial maximum was coming
to an end, an unexpected cold snap
occurred 12,900
years ago, plunging North America into
one of the coldest periods of the entire
Ice Age. Unfortunately, this devastated
many of the largest megafauna living in
the Americas, such as woolly mammoths
and mastodons, many of which were driven
to extinction.
Of course, other factors may have played
a minor role in their demise, including
the role of humans and the breakdown of
food webs.
With the dwindling number of large
animals roaming the American landscape,
a vital source of sustenance for the
Clovis people was lost. Undoubtedly,
this forced them to seek out new lands
and invent new technologies to hunt
smaller animals and game, and
eventually, they morphed into small,
distinct cultures.
Researchers have compared several
regional point styles or distinct stone
implements that appear to have evolved
from the older Clovis culture.
This includes the Folsom tradition,
located in central North America, the
Cumberland culture, found in middle and
southern parts of North America, the
Suwannee and Simpson points,
respectively unearthed in the southeast,
and the Gainey points, located around
the enchanting banks of the Great Lakes
region.
Of these, Folsom was the largest and
most prominent, leaving behind a
plethora of stone points that tell the
story of this post-Clovis people.
Their fluted projectiles have been
discovered over a vast distance along
the Western High Plains, stretching from
Canada to Mexico.
Many Folsom points have been unearthed
in pristine condition, showcasing the
level of craftsmanship these early
Americans possessed. They are long and
slender, and generally range from 2 to 3
in long, with some examples exceeding 3
in. The Folsom is still
The Folsom is still much smaller in
weight and size than most Clovis points
when in unaltered condition.
The Folsom people specialized in hunting
giant bison, a now extinct species,
evidenced by the large concentration of
their points found in association with
bison bones.
Despite the clear distinction between
the Folsom people and the other cultures
that arose following the disappearance
of the Clovis people, anthropologists
were confident they were related
ancestrally. Modern historians classify
the Clovis culture and its predecessors
as Paleo-Indians.
However, whether these groups share a
single ancestral origin remained
uncertain until a pivotal 2014 study in
the journal Nature, which analyzed
ancient DNA to trace their genetic
lineage.
A team of scientists under the command
of lead author Eske Willerslev from the
University of Copenhagen sequenced the
complete genome of a male infant
unearthed in Western Montana around
12,600
years ago.
Discovered at the Anzick burial site,
the area has gained prominence as a
Clovis treasure trove. According to the
study, here approximately 100 stone
tools and 15 osseous tool fragments that
are technologically consistent with the
artifacts of the Clovis complex were
found in direct association with the
partial fragmentary remains of an infant
child.
After meticulously analyzing the results
of their testing, the researchers were
able to determine the child's belongs to
a population from which many
contemporary Native Americans descended
and is closely related to all indigenous
American populations. In fact, some 80%
of all present-day Native American
populations on the two American
continents are direct descendants of the
Clovis boy's family.
The remaining 20% are still more closely
related to the Clovis family than any
other group on Earth.
In short, it appears as if the
researchers had discovered credible
evidence to suggest the Clovis people
and the cultures that superseded it,
including the Folsom, are the ancestors
of the vast majority of Native Americans
found across the Americas today.
But that wasn't the only fascinating
part of the study. In addition, it sheds
light on the migration that led these
early trailblazers from Eurasia to their
new home.
According to the work of the accredited
team of researchers, the genome of the
child suggests his ancestors migrated
from Siberia into North America over
32,000
years ago.
This places the oldest migration of
humans to the continent at 20,000 years
before the Clovis culture even appeared
in the archaeological record. The team
also proposed that Native American
ancestors coming from Siberia split into
two groups.
One comprises ancestors of Native
Americans presently living in Canada,
whereas the other, represented by the
Clovis boy, is the ancestor of virtually
all Native Americans in South America
and Mexico.
The Paleo-Indian period roughly extends
from 16,000 years ago to around 8,000
years ago.
As researchers continue to conduct
in-depth studies throughout the
continents, they have gained incredible
insight into the daily lives of
Paleo-Indians. Studying the sites and
distinct artifacts has allowed them to
understand their daily lives. These
early Americans utilized a plethora of
tools ranging from microblades for
butchering and hide processing to axes,
points, and even animal bones turned
into needles.
However, some of the most significant
advancements have come about by studying
the beautiful rock art left behind by
migrating Paleo-Indians in regions
across Latin America, such as the
Serranía de la Lindosa
in Colombia. The paintings there are
thought to be 12,800
years old, coinciding with the end of
the last ice age. A distinctive
assortment of depictions were carefully
drawn onto the walls in red ochre,
leaving behind the legacies of these
ancient peoples. Extinct animals,
including native horses and ground
sloths, make up parts of the fresco,
accompanied by cryptic symbols and
sigils, likely associated with religious
and spiritual traditions.
While many of these paintings may have
been mere creative expressions, experts
summarize that they could have also been
used as educational tools to teach the
younger generations about different
species of animals and plants.
Much of the cave art at Serranía de la
Lindosa
and those in other parts of South
America contain symbolic art depicting
the spiritual world.
Beautifully explained by Francisco
Javier Aceituno, an archaeologist at the
University of Antioquia, Colombia, as
photographs of the past.
The researcher is certain we can learn a
great deal about the earliest Americans
by studying these thought-invoking
paintings. Some form of ancestry
spirituality is clearly evident in
Paleoamerican art. Speaking on the
sprawling canvas at Serranía de la
Lindosa, Aceituno said, "There are
scenes of dancing rituals or shamanic
rites. With these spiritual scenes,
people were trying to domesticate the
natural world by controlling the forces
of nature."
Through the meticulous study of art,
researchers have come to better
understand the complexity of America's
first humans. They were not just simple
hunter-gatherers, but innovative humans
who sought to create a new life in a
distant land for the sake of their
people.
Along with their knowledge of survival,
they brought their spiritual beliefs and
religious customs to the new world,
evolving each of these aspects of
culture as they ventured throughout the
continents.
As they began to settle in regions
throughout the continents, researchers
have started to suspect that the
Paleoindians may have had an
unprecedented effect on biodiversity and
plant life during an era of profound
climatic activity.
Rock art found in parts of the Amazon
hints that humans were managing plant
species about 9,000 years ago. That
could explain the persistence of
valuable plants in the Amazon now. An
extraordinary number of distinct plants
utilized for food and medicine can be
found throughout the bountiful jungle.
Many medicines and drugs originate from
the Amazon, earning it the nickname the
world's largest medicine cabinet. As Ace
Tuño goes on to explain that the
Paleo-Indians achieved a balance in the
management of natural resources. Plants
and animals were more than food. They
were also seen as living beings to be
respected. The people used the
preservation principle. I cannot
extinguish my resources, my food.
The work of researchers such as Ace Tuño
has been pivotal in increasing our
understanding of Paleo-Indians and just
how complex their society truly was.
With the advancements of genealogy, we
have learned a great deal about the
ancestral origins of these early
Americans and their intricate web of
connections that spread throughout the
landscape.
But if you thought that this solved the
story of humans in the Americas, you'd
be wrong. As in the wake of the various
innovative studies, further mysteries
centered on genealogy began to arise
deep in the south. Going back to the
study of Reich, who showcased a link
between the Clovis people and the
Fishtail culture of South America, their
work may have opened up one door, but it
left them banging at another without
answers.
Reich and his team analyzed the remains
of at least 49 individuals who lived
around 11,000 years ago. As mentioned
earlier in the video, they found
credible evidence to suggest these
individuals unearthed in parts of
Brazil, Chile, and Belize were
ancestrally related to the Clovis people
of North America.
Their work surmised the dispersal of the
Fishtail culture, named after a specific
stone implement that shared
characteristics similar to the Clovis
point was the work of a group from a
shared lineage.
However, as Reich and his team continued
to analyze the remains of more
individuals, they stumbled upon a
finding that shocks the archaeological
community to its core. They found
evidence to suggest that around 9,000
years ago in Central and South America,
the Clovis culture associated people
vanished and were replaced by a
different genetic lineage. To the
surprise of the researchers, they
meticulously examined the data to ensure
the authenticity of the results.
They later concluded that the vast
majority of people who lived across a
broad area stretching from Patagonia to
Belize from 9,000 to 3,000 years ago are
genetically distinct from the Clovis
culture's associated ancestors and that
of their successors.
So, who were these peculiar South
Americans? Well, as of yet, this enigma
has yet to be answered and the group's
true identity and origin continue to
evade researchers, meaning the mysteries
of the Americas are yet to reveal
themselves in their totality.
The genetic research suggests that
around 9,000 years ago a new population
arrived in South America leading to a
genetic shift distinct from Clovis
associated groups. Unlike North American
native groups, modern South Americans
show little to no genetic trace of
Clovis ancestry indicating a significant
population shift, a complex migration
patterns that are still not fully
understood.
This suggests that a continent-wide
population replacement occurred in South
America around 9,000 years ago.
In their search to find the origins of
this mysterious group, several hurdles
have prohibited researchers like Reich
from getting to the bottom of this
puzzle.
One is the lack of human remains from
South America that are more than 11,000
years old, meaning that they cannot
directly probe the initial movements of
people into Central and South America.
Speaking of the challenges, Reich said,
"We lacked [music] ancient data from
Amazonia, northern South America, and
the Caribbean, and thus cannot determine
how individuals in these regions relate
to the ones we analyzed."
Reich said in the statement, "Filling in
these gaps should be a priority for
future work."
As we attempt [music] to take in and
evaluate the totality of available
information centered on the region of
the first true Americans, it is clear
more research is required to truly solve
the mystery. However, researchers are
inching closer to their end goal, one
that will undoubtedly provide us with a
clear picture of the history of the
Americas. New studies continue to add to
the revelations from the nascent field
of ancient DNA that humans were
undoubtedly a more restless, wandering,
and intermingling species than we could
have ever imagined. In the millennia
that followed the splintering of the
Clovis culture and the mysterious
neighbors to the south, the first signs
of what would later bloom into distinct
tribal cultures began to appear.
These Paleo-Indians explored the lush
forests, trekked the desert wastelands,
climbed mountainous peaks, and explored
coastal regions all while migrating with
the seasons.
They laid the foundations for cultures
to thrive and prosper during the
entirety of the Stone Age, making
incremental, technological, and cultural
advancements with easy passing
generations.
The Paleo-Indians boldly went where no
human had gone before. What motivated
these humans to embark on such a journey
into the depths of the unknown is still
up for debate. Were they driven further
south into the Americas by an exhaustion
of local resources or a lack of animals
to hunt? This explanation ignores the
irrefutable evidence that the virgin
continents were abundant in food from
all sources and that such a plethora of
sustenance could not be exhausted by
such a small population.
Eske Willerslev, the prominent
researcher from the University of
Copenhagen, has proposed that in
addition to environmental pressures,
early migrants may have been motivated
by a drive to explore new lands. While
survival needs played a key role, the
possibility of curiosity as a factor in
human expansion remains an intriguing
hypothesis.
In time, they would slowly morph into
the various distinct cultures of the
late Neolithic and Bronze Eras, better
known as the indigenous [music] groups
of the Americas today.
As the Paleo-Indian period came to
[music] an end, early inhabitants
underwent a significant transition in
their way of life. The disappearance of
large megafauna and the need to sustain
growing populations forced the migratory
hunter-gatherers to adapt. By the
Archaic period, which began around
10,000 years ago, these early pioneers
had undergone a remarkable [music]
transformation.
The earliest Paleo-Indians arrived in
the Americas during a period of colder
and wetter climatic [music] conditions.
However, by the Archaic period, the
continent experienced significant
environmental changes, including a shift
toward a warmer and drier climate, which
influenced human subsistence strategies
and settlement patterns. Notable changes
in this transformation included the
expansion of prairie vegetation and a
decrease in forested areas. This shift
in climate heavily influenced the
lifestyle and adaptations of Archaic
peoples as they were forced to rely on
different plant and animal resources.
So, much like the major changes to their
surroundings, like today, the Native
American groups went through their own
sort of cultural transition.
Now spread across the continents, groups
increased in size and transitioned to
more of a sedentary lifestyle,
preferring to forage from seasonal camps
instead of roaming the entire landscape.
As they acclimated to their new
environments, the Archaic Americans
sought sustenance in the form of fish,
fowl, and wild plants, including seeds.
However, all of the latter changes pale
in comparison to the most significant
development [music] during this period,
the appearance of agriculture. This
brought about a monumental shift that
would have a long-lasting and profound
effect on the history of the continents.
Large-scale agriculture is often
considered a prerequisite [music]
for civilization, as it's unlikely that
large numbers can be sustained without
the means to feed tens of tens of
thousands of people. As early as 8000
BC, researchers have discovered evidence
of crops appearing in both Mexico and
South America. The earliest of these was
the humble squash, which remains a
staple for many native cultures in the
Americas even today.
Seeds of this smooth and stringy fruit
have been found in caves in Oaxaca and
the Tehuacan Valley. As experts
continued to study the archaeological
record meticulously, they found evidence
that clearly showcases how the wild
squash seeds increased in size,
providing researchers with undeniable
proof of incipient domestication.
Far to the south of the fertile valleys
of Mexico, amongst the majestic [music]
towering peaks of the Andes, we find
evidence of the cultivation of beans,
potatoes, tomatoes, and peanuts during
the Archaic period. But no single crop
can be said to have influenced the lives
of the ancient Americans quite like the
admirable corn plant. The origins of
maize take us back to the fertile
lowlands of southwest Mexico some 10,000
years ago. Thought to have originated
from the wild grass teosinte, maize was
modified over time by early
horticulturalists, eventually producing
the plant we know today. To these early
Americans, corn became more of a staple
form of sustenance. [music]
It was looked upon as a sacred symbol of
life and sustenance, deeply intertwined
with their spiritual beliefs, and was
considered a gift from the gods, shaping
their agricultural practices, mythology,
and social structure across
civilizations. In time, Archaic
Americans grew certain crops together,
such as corn, beans, and squash, and
referred to this combination as the
three sisters due to their symbiotic
growing practices. [music]
Utilizing ancient studies of the plants,
these early Americans realized the
plants mutually benefit each other when
planted close by. The corn provides a
structure for the beans to climb. The
beans add nitrogen to the soil for the
corn,
>> [music]
>> and the squash leaves shade the ground,
preventing weeds and retaining moisture,
creating a symbiotic ecosystem that
maximizes yield and nutrition. As
growing techniques spread throughout the
Americas via extensive trade networks
and cultivation became increasingly more
prevalent, we saw another drastic change
in the lives of humans on the continent.
Despite their innate desire to migrate
with seasons and explore the entirety of
the horizon, the development of
agriculture allowed for the creation of
permanent settlements. With a reliable
food source, it no longer became
necessary to move from one place to
another in search of sustenance.
Instead, groups could settle down in
permanent settlements, and those who did
eventually experienced a significant
[music]
increase in population growth. Emerging
from this new-found experience, we see
the first societies of the Americas. As
they grew larger, specialized roles
emerged, leading to the development of
social hierarchies and different social
classes, and eventually the first
civilizations on the continent.
A tale of cotton and trade, the first
civilization of the Americas.
As the sands of time slowly trickled
away in the Americas, great leaps of
innovation occurred, transforming the
early settlers from mere
hunter-gatherers to bustling human
settlements categorized by agricultural
expertise, cultural advancements, and
spiritual traditions. The agricultural
prowess [music] of the settlers was
particularly significant, as it not only
provided sustenance, but also allowed
for surplus production, leading to the
establishment of large population
centers. With these particular
advancements, it was only a matter of
time before a fully fledged civilization
arose in the Americas, the first signs
of which we find along the north central
coast of Peru.
Nestled amongst the wind-swept desert of
the Supe Valley in Peru, [music] immense
dune-like monuments emerge from beneath
the scorched sands. While they appear to
be nothing more than the work of Mother
Nature, upon further inspection, these
mounds of dirt are the last remnants of
an ancient pyramid-building culture that
existed in the region thousands of years
ago.
Now known as the Norte Chico
civilization, it arose in the region as
early as 3,500
BCE. Over time, this primordial American
civilization grew to include as many as
30 large population centers, all of
which are composed of massive communal
buildings, temple-like structures, and
pyramids. At the heart of the
civilization lay the sprawling city of
Caral, which covered a 163-acre
astonishing town.
Here, he finds the awe-inspiring
Pirámide Mayor, a [music] towering
pyramid-like structure that is equal in
size to around four football [music]
fields. The monument has an enormous
30-ft wide staircase that rises from a
sunken circular plaza at the foot of the
pyramid, passing over three terraced
levels until it reaches the top of
[music] the platform. Such an extensive
building project would have required
thousands of manual laborers. On top of
this, various architects, [music]
craftsmen, supervisors, and other
managers would have been necessary to
ensure things went smoothly.
All of this points towards not only an
advanced society or culture, but also
the earliest signs of civilization in
the Americas.
Flanking this mysterious city are the
remains of a series of smaller mounds,
various buildings, and residential
complexes. After meticulously studying
the ruins, archaeologists discovered a
hierarchy in living arrangements. Large,
well-kept rooms atop the pyramids for
the elite, ground-level complexes for
craftsmen, and shabbier outlying
shantytowns for workers.
To the inhabitants of Caral, the city
served as a hub of innovation and
technology. Its people built highly
advanced irrigation systems, turning a
desert into a productive agricultural
economy.
Archaeologists are sure the Norte Chico
[music] culture represents the first
complex society in the Americas. It is
known as one of the six major world
areas where civilization developed
independently.
Other old world civilizations like
Mesopotamia, Egypt, and India traded
goods and information with each other,
but Norte Chico developed in total
isolation from [music] different
societies. But this leaves us with one
obvious question: How was this possible?
Why did the ancient Americans living in
Peru succeed when others couldn't? To
researchers, the answer lies in the
development of these irrigation [music]
systems, which played a pivotal role in
the cultivation of cotton and other
crops, and facilitated trade with
coastal communities for seafood.
Before cotton, fishing nets comprised of
plant fibers, which took a tedious
amount of time to make and maintain.
However, with the tremendous
agricultural innovations within Caral,
[music]
more nets could be made, meaning more
fish could be caught.
As coastal and inland communities worked
together, a bustling society emerged.
This resulted in a vibrant economy that
required a centralized government, and
Caral became the administrative center
for the entire civilization. In many
ways, the civilization centered at Caral
functioned in a manner similar to how
society works today. People had
specialized yet interconnected roles
that benefited one another. Yet, despite
the size of the civilization, with as
many as 20,000 people living in the
valley, there were no signs of defensive
construction, weapons, or violence of
any kind, meaning some leader or central
decision-making group could organize a
large workforce in massive construction
projects over extended periods through
non-violent means. Another significant
discovery at Caral was a quipu, a
record-keeping device made of a string
of knotted ropes. Quipus were used to
recover dates, census data, inventory,
and tax information. The Caral quipu was
the oldest ever found, meaning the Norte
Chico people had a reason to record and
store data for later use.
The culture's remarkable monumental
architecture, complex social
organization, and sustainable economy
based on both agriculture and seafood
harvesting stand as a stark reminder of
the ingenuity of ancient peoples of the
Americas.
Nomadic astrologers of the Old World,
the first mound builders of the
Americas.
As the people of Caral paved the way for
civilization in South America, far to
the north, several distinct cultures
were actively engaged in a technological
revolution of their own.
Among the sprawling grasslands of
northeastern Louisiana, nestled on the
banks of the Watson Brake River, we find
a complex mystery that extends back over
5,500
years.
In present-day Ouachita Parish lies
Watson Brake, an ancient archaeological
site that has long-lasting implications
for studying ancient Americans. At the
center of this site, we see an intricate
network of earthen mounds meticulously
constructed by humans many millennia
ago. Of these, the largest is known as
Mound A to researchers and is
approximately 25 ft tall and has a
diameter of an astonishing 230 ft.
Despite the allure of the site, it has
only been further intensified by
researchers who revealed a group of
distinct hunter-gatherers constructed it
who we now know as the Mound Builders.
The Watson Brake Earthworks in Louisiana
date back over 5,500
[music]
years, making them older than the
pyramids of Giza and Stonehenge.
However,
>> [music]
>> their precise function remains uncertain
as no definitive evidence of their
purpose, [music] such as burials or
ceremonial artifacts, have been found.
With no burials, few artifacts, or even
signs of use after their initial
building, the mounds are assumed to have
had some ceremonial use, even if it were
only a unique exercise in marking group
identity or a singular instance of
focused coercion. The people who created
the Watson Brake Mounds did not live on
the site. Evidence of habitation from
the same period in Louisiana indicates
[music] the people had not yet developed
agriculture in any focused way and led
lives of seasonal settlement. But, could
a migratory culture without agriculture
undertake such a mammoth project?
Long-standing theories about how
cultures must operate once insisted that
large-scale earthworks such as those
found at Watson Brake could not be built
until hierarchical status systems
developed with chiefs or someone of
power to designate labor. In addition,
archaeologists theorized that a
mound-building society had to be
supported by agriculture because it was
thought that hunting and gathering could
not provide enough sustenance to feed
the workers [music] required for
mound-building projects. However, in
their quest for knowledge, researchers
working from Watson Brake, [music]
the LSU campus Indian Mounds, and other
middle and late Archaic sites have
toppled these ideas. Most mainstream
academics now agree that the profound
natural resources were abundant enough
to support mound builders and that
permanent status hierarchies were
unnecessary to get the job done. Several
minor artifacts have been recovered from
the site, shedding a small amount of
light on this mysterious culture.
Several distinctive and characteristic
stone points [music] have been unearthed
at Watson Brake, known as the Evans
point. Archaic period toolmakers
typically created a single pair of
notches up the side of a stone point,
which helped fasten the point to a
spear. But, the Evans point had a
curious second pair of notches on the
point blade. These additional notches
could have provided a more secure
fastening, but do not appear on examples
in later periods. Other finds include
bricks and stone implements, but nothing
indicates why these seemingly migratory
groups decided to take the considerable
amount of time required to create such
enormous earthen mounds. While they
started small, some kind of formal plan
was employed in their construction. Some
researchers have noted the existence of
a universal system of measurement and
geometry. This suggests a profound level
of technical skill and
intercommunication was present among the
Middle Archaic mound builders. Were they
constructed as religious monuments that
had ongoing spiritual significance? They
may have marked the group's identity and
reinforced social cooperation. Or did
they signify the presence of resources
[music] in the region in a simple
manner?
The mystery of Watson Brake continues to
intrigue [music] researchers even today,
but they are left with more questions
than answers. By 2800 BCE,
all mound construction at the site had
ceased and would begin until the
emergence of the Poverty Point culture
over 1,000 years later.
But this didn't mark the end of mound
building in the Americas. Far from the
grasslands of Louisiana, we observe the
manipulation of the earth into sprawling
monuments in places such as Georgia,
Mississippi, and Florida, all of which
boast incredible sites.
While most appear thousands of years
after the builders of Watson Brake
disappeared, undoubtedly, their builders
placed a high degree of significance on
these earthen monuments. Being elegantly
constructed [music] across a vast swath
of land from the Great Lakes to the Gulf
of Mexico area over thousands of years,
the seemingly unrelated mound builders
have yet to reveal all of their secrets
to archaeologists.
But as time passes,
>> [music]
>> mounds like those at Watson Brake
continue to rewrite everything we
thought we knew about these [music]
ancient Americans. Further study at the
site in Louisiana revealed many of the
mounds are aligned with the rising and
setting of the sun during the summer and
winter solstices, suggesting a
deliberate astronomical alignment with
the stars at the time [music] of its
construction. Recent studies suggest
that these early societies demonstrated
a more complex understanding of
astronomy and engineering than
previously [music] assumed. Their
understanding of astronomy and the
movement of celestial bodies could lie
at the heart of the mysteries
surrounding the mounds at Watson Brake
and those scattered across the vast
American landscape.
The Old Copper [music] Complex of the
Great Lakes, North America's primeval
miners.
As ancient Americans came together in
unison under the humid subtropical
climate [music] in Louisiana to
carefully construct the original mounds
at Watson Brake, an entirely different
culture was present thousands of miles
to the north. One that would ultimately
usher in a new technological revolution.
The Great Lakes region played a crucial
role in this, as it was here that we see
the emergence of a unique society
characterized by its use of copper.
Early humans living in the area likely
stumbled upon naturally occurring
visible copper nuggets or veins in the
earth's surface, [music] most likely
near glacial deposits.
As they wandered the plains surrounding
the Lake Superior region, these early
nomads would have seen large nuggets
appearing from near the surface and in
gravel beds. Over time, their
fascination with the copper nuggets led
them to discover how malleable it is and
how it can be shaped into form to make a
variety of implements, thus marking the
start of the Copper Age in North
America. Despite varying theories humans
around the Great Lakes first utilized
this precious metal, by 4,000 BCE, it
had become an integral metal in the
daily lives of archaic Americans. Over
time, numerous quarries sprang up in
areas like Isle Royale, [music] the
Keweenaw Peninsula, and the Brule River.
Evidence of mining, such as deep holes
chipped into the rock, can be found in
Ontario, Manitoba, and around Lake
Superior. Primitive yet effective
techniques were used to extract [music]
the copper from the bedrock. Thousands
of grooved hammerstones found in and
around these prehistoric mining [music]
pits support the theory that a
significant amount of manual labor was
required to extract the copper ore. This
evidence underscores the unity and
cooperation of early Americans who
managed to form cohesive workforces
despite their nomadic lifestyle. Another
likely technique used to extract the ore
was thermally induced shattering, where
miners would light a fire beside the
desired ore vein, heating the rock
surface.
>> [music]
>> Applying water to this hot surface would
cause the rock to shatter, making it
easier to remove the copper ore. During
the early stages of their exploration of
this metal, the [music] ingenuity of
these groups was truly remarkable. They
discovered that they could shape the
nuggets into various forms using stone
hammers, a process we now refer to as
cold working. This was a significant
leap in their understanding of
metallurgy. As their expertise in
metallurgy continued to grow, they
learned that heat could soften the
material slightly, leading to the
development of the fabrication technique
known as annealing. Their experiments
with the metal [music] eventually led to
the discovery of smelting, a process
that involves heating the ore to high
temperatures to separate the pure copper
from the rock. Archaeologists have
discovered tens of thousands of copper
artifacts in the Great Lakes region,
ranging from simple tools to finely
crafted items that suggested specialized
metal working skills.
These artifacts provide insight into the
technological advancements and trade
networks of the Old Copper Culture. This
has led researchers such as E.J.
Neuberger to speculate that Old Copper
Complex artisans eventually discovered
how to smelt the rock. Archaeologists in
the modern refer to these pioneers in
the field of metallurgy as the Old
Copper Culture, and their innovative
methods allowed them to craft a wide
range of utilitarian tools like knives,
spear points, [music] awls, and axes,
all of which demonstrate just how
sophisticated their understanding of
copper manipulation truly was. Over
time, they also began crafting
decorative objects such as metal
pendants, bracelets, rings, beads, and
crescent-shaped ornaments, showcasing
another side of this fascinating
culture.
As the culture developed, copper
ornaments likely became symbols of
status and social differentiation.
However, some investigations into this
puzzling culture proposed that copper
may have even been some form of
spiritual significance for these early
Americans. As archaeologists
meticulously studied the burials of
various people associated with the Old
Copper Complex, they discovered a
varying degree of social differentiation
and complexity.
The dead were buried with various
artisanal items made of copper,
suggesting the metal may have evolved to
have a symbolic value to these groups.
As part of social complexity,
long-distance trade networks, and
mortuary ceremonial uses, it's [music]
clear copper slowly morphed to become
the backbone of the Copper Complex
culture and its successors. Looking back
at this small window into the past, we
see a mysterious culture that profoundly
influenced the surrounding region. The
advanced metallurgy skills developed by
the Old Copper culture were truly
remarkable. Despite being one of the
earliest metallurgical traditions in the
world, [music] their presence may have
faded, but their innovative methods
continue to stand as a testament to the
complexity of these early Americans and
the lasting impact they had on the
region.
Dawn of Dirt: The Rise of Pottery and a
Sedentary Life in the Americas.
In their quest to become masters of the
continents, Archaic Americans ventured
far and wide, experimenting with the
landscape and testing the very
foundations of Mother Nature. The first
signs of agriculture and metal appeared
during this iconic era, whilst we also
observe monumental cities and religious
monuments rising from the virgin
grounds. [music] As knowledge spread,
dependence on older primitive methods
began to dissipate, and between 4,000
and 3,000 years ago inhabitants of the
Americas began to enter a new era known
as the Woodland period. [music]
This unique period is characterized by
an increased level of expertise in
horticultural practices, the widespread
use of pottery and ceramics, and a sharp
increase in groups settling down in
permanent locations. Several factors
allowed these Native Americans to turn
away from a migratory lifestyle, one of
which was the advancements in pottery
technology, allowing containers to be
made in various shapes and sizes for
cooking, storing, and serving food.
[music] To archaeologists, a Woodland
period assemblage would include textile
marked, complicated stamped pottery, and
triangular points. The Woodland period
was a revolutionary period in the long
tapestry of American history, bringing
with [music] it an increasing cultural
complexity, population growth, and
technological innovation for many
indigenous cultures in North America.
Some of the most notable Woodland
cultures include the Adena and Hopewell
cultures, all of which engaged in the
widespread practice of mound building,
possibly influenced by the mysterious
groups who constructed the earthworks
during the Archaic period.
Emerging amongst the vast plains of Ohio
through to the mountainous peaks of West
Virginia and beyond to Kentucky and
Indiana, arose several communities of
North America with various similarities
now loosely grouped together as the
Adena culture.
These early peoples evolved past a
migratory lifestyle, instead preferring
to settle down in small villages
composed of circular houses with conical
roofs constructed from poles, willows,
and bark. They subsisted by hunting,
fishing, farming, and gathering wild
plant foods. Their utensils consisted of
such items such as stone hoes, axes, and
projectiles, stone smoking pipes, and
simple pottery. The Adena are
particularly remembered for their
agricultural practices, which enabled
their ancestors to transition away from
a hunter-gatherer lifestyle. They used
tools made of stone, animal bone, and
tortoise shells to grow squash,
pumpkins, gourds, sunflowers, and maize
crops.
This shift to agriculture not only
provided a more stable food source, but
also allowed for the development of more
complex societies and the establishment
of trade networks. This ancient culture
also had an extensive trade network
linking them with other indigenous
groups from the Great Lakes region in
the north to the Mississippi River
Valley in the west, and encompassing
parts of present-day Ohio, Kentucky,
West Virginia, Indiana, Illinois,
Missouri, and even extending into parts
of the Southern Appalachian Mountains,
allowing them to access materials like
copper, mica, and marine shells from
distant regions.
The Adena prospered in their native
homeland for close to a millennium, and
lasting traces of this culture remain in
the form of their enormous earthen
mounds. Deep in antiquity, it is thought
that hundreds of Adena mounds existed
across their traditional homeland, but
only a small number have survived
through to the modern era.
These enigmatic landmarks ranged in size
from as little as 6 ft high to towering
masterpieces that reached heights over
90 m. Considerable numbers would have
been required to create such monumental
earthworks, all of which were
constructed by nothing more than human
hands carrying baskets of specifically
selected dirt. The purposes behind their
construction range from burial
structures to ceremonial sites and
historical markers.
To this day, several enormous earthworks
can be seen across the valleys of Ohio
and no one can invoke a sense of awe and
wonder quite like the Serpent Mound
found in Peebles. Constructed as an
effigy mound, it is an enormous
earthwork that takes on the form of a
snake when seen from above. It stretches
for over 400 m and varies in height from
around 1 to 3 ft. The mouth of the
serpent opens onto a prominent
oval-shaped mound, which is believed to
have had an ongoing religious or
ceremonial significance.
Many questions surrounds the meaning of
the Serpent Mound, but there is little
doubt it symbolized some religious or
mythical principle for its builders.
It's thought that the Adena culture is
responsible for this architectural
masterpiece.
Bill Romain presented a paper entitled
Serpent Mound Project Results 2023,
where he goes into grave detail on why
he believes the Adena were the original
builders. His work provides the results
of radiocarbon tests conducted on
charcoal at the site, giving a date of
around 300 BC, which coincides with
Adena's presence in the region.
Despite his opinion and work, many are
still uncertain as to who truly
constructed this marvelous earthwork,
and much of its history is still
shrouded in mystery and controversy.
[music]
The Adena would slowly fade into the
background like many cultures before
them. By 200 CE, this once prosperous
culture had [music] disappeared as a
distinct cultural group, with most
archaeologists believing they may have
been absorbed into the later Hopewell
culture.
However, some researchers suggest
there's more to the puzzle, claiming
that the Hopewell evolved from the Adena
over a period of several centuries. In
this manner, the Adena is thought to
have drastically influenced the Hopewell
culture, which built on Adena's cultural
and technological advancements.
Nonetheless, the exact reason for their
decline remain unclear and could involve
factors like environmental changes or
social shifts. By 100 BCE, the Hopewell
culture arose as a prominent society,
primarily located in the Ohio River
Valley. Their influence extended to the
eastern parts of the US. The Hopewell
culture lived in villages along rivers
and streams. They built dome-shaped
houses covered [music] with bark, animal
hides, or woven mats. They hunted,
fished, and gathered wild nuts, fruits,
seeds, and roots to feed their growing
population, but they also grew crops
such as corn and possibly beans and
squash. Building on the advancements
made by their predecessors, this
prominent culture continued the custom
of earthworks and mound periods.
However, their monuments far exceeded
the size witnessed during the Adena
period. The Hopewell became masters of
trade, building on the older trade
network of their predecessors. They
exchanged goods like obsidian, copper,
and shells over long distances with
peoples in the Ohio and Illinois River
Valleys, the Great Lakes, the Gulf
Coast, and the Rocky Mountains. As time
progressed in the Woodland period, the
adoption of farming became a common
practice, and new varieties of maize,
beans, and squash were introduced to
many groups across the Americas. This
period also saw the emergence of tribal
communities, each under the influential
leadership of a chief. These chiefs
played a crucial role in the
organization and governance of their
communities. However, the growing
population and resulting decline in
trade led to an increase in conflict
among settlements, paving the way for
the turbulent period that would follow
over the next millennia.
>> As the warm glow of the sun descends
upon the vast plains of the American
continent during the first millennium
AD, [music] we find innovative and
ingenious cultures that have come to
dominate the landscape. [music]
As these native groups gazed out to the
lands that lay before them, no doubt it
may have appeared similar in many
regards to that observed by their
archaic ancestors [music] thousands of
years ago. By the Middle Woodland
period, often defined by archaeologists
as occurring between 200 BC and 500 AD,
the Hopewell tradition rose to
prominence as one of the greatest
cultures in American history. [music] It
flourished during this era, influencing
various cultures across its [music] vast
trade network. Archaeologists generally
agree that Hopewell and their
predecessors, the Adena, were one of
North American's earliest [music]
civilizations and the first to construct
extensive city-like settlements. During
an era in which the Roman empires had
been engaged in a brutal conquest of
Europe and North Africa in an attempt to
control the lucrative trade routes of
the Mediterranean world, the ingenuity
of the Hopewell allowed them to
establish a vast trading network of
their own across the eastern half of the
United States,
expanding on the trade networks
developed by their Adena predecessors,
the Hopewell extended an intricate web
of commerce from the Crystal River
Indian Mounds in Florida to the northern
shores of Lake Ontario, the Gulf Coast,
and from the Mississippi River far to
the east. They produced beautiful
artwork, and artisans crafted various
unique goods, including stone pipes in
the shape of effigy animals, which were
used to smoke tobacco and a number of
other substances.
The impact of the Hopewell during the
Woodlands period cannot be overstated.
Their extensive trade network and
cultural exchange laid the groundwork
for future civilizations, and their
influence can still be seen in modern
society. [music]
However, in our efforts to explore the
complexity of this civilization using a
modern lens, we generally define the
Hopewell as one single culture. However,
these groups were far more diverse and
complex than is often recognized.
[music] In fact, the Hopewell tradition
was an intricate network of various
interconnected Native American groups
[music] who shared standard trade
practices and cultural elements across a
large region.
They left an indelible mark on the
landscape, which is still evident today
across their traditional [music]
homelands centered in Ohio and extending
throughout the Midwestern states. The
Hopewell were masters of land survey and
geometry, continuing on and building
upon the Adena custom [music] of
earthworks and mound pyramids, but on a
much grander scale. Massive earthworks
were etched into the landscape, often
constructed [music] in clusters of 10 to
20 mounds. It's been estimated that
10,000 [music] once covered the
heartland of this culture, but over
time, this has been reduced to a few
thousand. What remains a mystery is how
such enormous construction projects were
possible.
An impressive level of coordination
[music] was needed to build all these
earthworks as a sophisticated form of
mathematics including a standard
measuring system and an understanding
[music] of geometry was necessary. One
measurement that is found at many sites
is 1,053
ft apparent in various parts of the
structure. Many areas are also enclosed
in precisely 20 acres. Such repetition
found at many of the earth and
structures showcases that they were
intentional in where and how they built
these monuments. They make up some of
the most impressive indigenous
structures [music] in the Americas and
from above many take on the shape of
animals, birds, and serpents. [music]
Embedded into many of these
architectural wonders is a profound
understanding [music] of astrology.
The Hopewell builders aligned many of
their mounds and monuments with the
rising and setting of the sun, moon, and
planets. The remnants of the monuments
stand as a testament [music] to the
cultural achievements of the Hopewell.
But their golden era would be
short-lived. [music]
By around 500 AD this once prosperous
culture had all but vanished. No longer
were enormous mounds constructed on the
landscape. Their vast trade network went
cold and their unique arts disappeared
from the archaeological record.
Researchers have put forth various
reasons behind the [music] collapse of
the Hopewell tradition citing a rising
level of hostility between [music]
tribes. As villages and settlements grew
in size towards the end of the culture,
larger communities began building
defensive walls and ditches. Climate
change may have also played a prominent
role in the demise of the Hopewell.
Colder conditions drove animals further
north or west beyond their homeland.
This had a detrimental effect on both
game and plants, drastically reducing
these [music] crucial food sources. The
introduction of the bow and arrow, a
highly effective weapon that improved
hunting techniques but also intensified
warfare, further drove people into
larger fortified communities. With fewer
people using trade routes, the network
linking people to the Hopewell
traditions ultimately declined. Whatever
the reason for their ultimate demise,
archaeological evidence has proven that
the groups didn't face extinction. As
genetic evidence has proven, the
Hopewell are the ancestors of the
Chippewa, Delaware, Kickapoo, Miami,
Ottawa, Peoria, Potawatomi, Seneca,
Shawnee, and Wyandot.
Since we started this channel, we have
been obsessed with historical maps.
Since [music] some of you might like
maps as well, we created a few products
for you. High-resolution downloads and
museum-quality prints. Go to
knowledgea.co and have a look. If you
want to own one, use my code in the
description below. Now, back to the
video.
As the Hopewell's once bright lights of
cultural innovation began to dim far to
the north, Mesoamerican cultures entered
a golden age of their own. As we
continue to peel back the grand tapestry
of these continents, we find thriving
cultures such as the Olmec and Zapotec
in Central America, inhabitants of parts
of southern Mexico.
But while these cultures were innovative
in their own right, it could be said
that none have had a lasting effect
[music] on the evolution of Mesoamerica
quite like the Maya, whose heartlands
lay in modern Guatemala, parts of
Belize, Chiapas, and the Yucatán
Peninsula. Fabled for their great stone
cities, towering pyramids, and
scientific advancements, the Maya rose
to their greatest height during [music]
the Classical Period, which
archaeologists claim lasted from 250 to
900 CE.
Major cities such as Tikal, Copan, and
Palenque flourished during this period,
each with a population up to 50,000
residents,
a testament to the grandeur of the Maya
civilization. They thrived partly due to
their expertise in cultivating and
harvesting corn, beans, and squash to
support a growing population.
They implemented a form of
slash-and-burn agriculture like some
groups in North America, and their
innovative and advanced forms of
irrigation and terracing allowed them to
grow enormous amounts of food. By the
height of the Mayan civilization, it is
estimated that there were around 2
million people, most of whom lived in
the lowlands of Guatemala.
With a stockpile of sustenance, the Maya
could develop into a flourishing
civilization with a unique form of
politics far ahead of its time. These
governments, characterized by a
hierarchical structure and a system of
tribute and taxation, could bring
together large numbers of residents from
the community to engage in large-scale
building projects, such as the
construction of sprawling cities that
often held various enormous pyramids,
sacred [music] temples, and luxurious
palaces. But what truly set them apart
from other cultures was their distinct
and complex hieroglyphic [snorts]
writing system. Using paper made from
the inner bark of wild fig trees, they
used these intricate symbols to write
extensive codices. Primarily, these were
centered on astronomical information,
including predictions of solar and lunar
eclipses, the movements of planets like
Venus, essential dates on their
calendar, religious rituals, and
sometimes even historical events.
Using a fairly basic but highly
effective number system consisting of
three symbols, the Maya became masters
of time, mathematics, and the stars.
Using this knowledge, they developed one
of the most accurate calendar [music]
systems in human history. The most
commonly known of these cyclical
calendars are the Haab, the Tzolkin, and
the Calendar Round, but the Long
Calendar is often considered the most
intriguing of all, as it records
mythical and historical events, some
extending back tens of thousands of
years. Despite the advancements made by
the Mayans during the classical period,
they suffered a fate similar to that of
many civilizations that came before
them. Starting around 900 AD, their
civilization entered into a rapid
decline, leaving many of their renowned
cities and ceremonial centers abandoned.
Over time, the forests began to engulf
the once proud pyramids and temples, and
the cities fell into ruin. Scholars are
still in debate as to what led to the
collapse of this once prosperous
civilization. Some claim armed conflicts
and the exhaustion of natural resources
and agricultural land are responsible
for their sudden decline. However,
studies conducted in more recent decades
have [music] pointed to territorial
disputes over land and river trade
routes as additional [music] reasons.
These disputes, often leading to violent
conflicts, may have weakened the social
and political structure of the Maya
contributing to their downfall.
Nonetheless, by the end of the first
millennium AD, major cities such as
Palenque, Tikal, and Calakmul were
abandoned as the once great and
prosperous Maya [music] civilization had
become a shadow of its former glory. The
sacred river valleys and monumental
mounds, life during the Mississippian
period. In the grand tapestry of North
American history, the emergence of the
Mississippian culture stands as a
significant chapter with long-lasting
effects. The indigenous groups of North
America were [music] forced to reckon
with the reality of the changing
landscape and environment. Mother
Nature's unforgiving presence could
uproot settled tribes at any point
forcing them to seek [music] sustenance
and shelter in distant lands. In the
upheaval that followed the golden era of
the Hopewell, we see a stark decline in
social cohesion throughout the northern
Mississippi and Ohio valleys. But this
wouldn't last forever. [music] Just as
the Maya had begun to abandon their
sacred temples in the lowlands of
Guatemala, the Mississippian culture
emerged on the fertile banks of the
Mississippian River Valley. This
innovative culture's influence extended
along the lower Ohio River Valley and
they would go on to dominate the
Midwestern, Southeastern, and inland
Eastern parts of North America for
around eight centuries. Known as the
Mississippian culture, this powerful
civilization was characterized by
fortified towns or small homesteads,
most of which were under the command of
a complex chiefdom. We see signs of
centralized control of political and
religious power under these groups
bringing with it the beginning of a
settlement hierarchy in which one major
center held influence over a number of
smaller settlements and communities. The
Mississippians still scoured the land
for sustenance, hunting animals and
gathering plants. [music]
However, they were primarily farmers.
The wide-scale adoption of maize-based
agriculture resulted in more intensive
cultivation techniques. During this era,
we see a particular reverence towards
growing the three sisters, a name given
to the symbiotic relationship between
corn, beans, and squash. The so-called
sisters provided a stable and balanced
diet, making a larger population
possible. Thousands of people lived in
larger towns and cities, and distinct
roles appeared in society, including
those of artisans, builders, and
craftsmen.
A typical Mississippian town would have
truly been a sight to behold. They were
constructed close to rivers or creeks,
and could cover as much as 10 acres of
land. The entirety of a settlement was
often enclosed by a palisade, a type of
wooden [music] fence composed of
standing logs embedded upright in the
ground. Homes were small, yet cozy,
often being approximately 12 by 10 ft in
size.
Like their predecessors, this society
consisted of numerous distinct tribes,
all of whom shared various cultural
attributes. They adopted multiple
aspects of the earlier Hopewell
tradition, including constructing
enormous earthworks, pyramids, and
platform mounds. Such mounds were
usually square, rectangular, or
occasionally circular. However, the
reason for the construction of
earthworks may have differed within the
Mississippian culture, as they were
topped with a temple-like structure or
even a domestic home atop their peak. At
the hearts of most Mississippian towns,
[music] lay an enormous ceremonial
plaza, serving as a gathering place that
could be utilized for a number of
purposes, [music]
ranging from religious to social. The
complexity of the Mississippian culture
is [music] yet to be fully understood,
but by studying sites such as Moundville
in Alabama and Etowah in Georgia,
archaeologists continue to highlight
just how advanced this ancient culture
was. But no site invokes a sense of
wonder and awe quite like Cahokia,
proudly nestled on the Mississippi River
flood plain around 13 km northeast of
St. Louis in Missouri. Considered the
largest pre-Columbian settlements north
of Mexico, this Mississippian site is
one of the finest examples of the
culture's cultural, [music]
religious, and economic prowess. Known
more commonly as the Cahokia Mounds, it
covered nearly 1,600
ha
during the height of the culture and an
astonishing 120 mounds. It is a
fascinating example of the complexity
observed within Mississippian chiefdom
societies, evidenced by the numerous
satellite mound centers and outlying
hamlets and villages. At its greatest
extent, this agricultural society may
have boasted an impressive population of
10 to 20,000 people, [music] which was
at its peak between 1050 and 1150. The
true scale of the workforce these tribal
communities could muster is showcased by
many of the primary features that tower
on the landscape even today, such as
Monk Mound, the largest prehistoric
earthwork in the Americas. It measures
an impressive 1,000 ft in length, more
than 700 ft in width, and is still 100
feet in height. The enormous mound was
carefully constructed by Mississippian
builders who manually transported basket
loads of clay and soil to the site.
Surprisingly, all the material was
transported to the site in woven baskets
without wheels or animals. Then,
layer-by-layer, the tribal architect
instructed the workers on placement,
essentially creating a massive earthen
platform mound.
At the height of the Mississippian
culture, the influence of this
innovative and prosperous culture
extended across the Southeast and the
midcontinent.
It was prevalent in the river valleys of
what are now the states of Mississippi,
Alabama, Georgia, Arkansas, Missouri,
Kentucky, Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio
with scattered extensions northward into
Wisconsin and Minnesota, and westward
into the Great Plains. The legacy of the
Mississippian culture lives on in
modern-day Native American groups who
claim descent from it, including the
Alabama, Apalachee, Caddo, Cherokee,
Chickasaw, Choctaw, [music] Muscogee
Creek, Guale, Hitchiti, Houma, Kansa,
Missouri, Mobilian, Natchez, Osage,
Quapaw, Seminole, Tunica Biloxi,
Yamasee, and Yuchi.
Architects of old, the largest building
of pre-industrial America.
Nuzzled among the dry and rugged
landscape of Northwestern New Mexico,
carefully concealed within the borders
of the Navajo Nation, lies one of the
most significant archaeological sites
ever constructed in the Americas. As
Mississippian builders meticulously
gathered dirt to lay the foundations of
enormous mounds along their sacred river
valleys, a distinct group we know today
as the ancestral Puebloans engaged in a
number of mega building projects of
their own. The heartlands of this
culture was centered in the northern
Southwest around the Four Corners
region. According to the current
archaeological consensus, the Puebloan
people first arrived in the Southwest as
early as 1200 BCE,
but many suggest it could have been much
sooner. There was a considerable level
of regional diversity amongst the early
ancestral Puebloans, but several common
traits were observed throughout the
culture. They depended heavily on
cultivated foods including corn, [music]
and those settled in the western part of
the Southwest were primarily dry or
floodwater farmers who developed a
particular set of religious beliefs that
emphasized the sacred importance [music]
of rain. Several other aspects are
apparent at many Puebloan sites
including the construction of pueblos,
which are multi-room and at times
multi-story [music]
masonry structures. Kivas, or distinct
subterranean ceremonial centers, are
also common at many sites alongside a
distinctive form of pottery. Sometime
between 900 and 1150
AD, the group of ancestral Puebloans
began constructing a city-like
settlements in the northwest corner of
New Mexico at a place known as Chaco
Canyon. Here, on the desert plains often
subject to chilling temperatures wedged
between towering sandstone cliffs, the
ancient Americans would go on to engage
in a large-scale construction project
that produced the largest buildings in
North America until the 19th century.
Dozens of man-made structures dot the
landscape from [music] small chambers to
so-called great houses such as Pueblo
Bonito, these enigmatic structures that
lie in ruin within the canyon stand as a
reminder that this desolate region was
once [music] bustling with human
activity. The monumental scale of
architecture observed in the canyon
showcases the complexity of the society
that existed here. They possessed a high
level of communal organization that
allowed the Puebloans to plan and
successfully construct [music] massive
stone buildings known as great houses
using masonry techniques that were
advanced for their time.
The great houses of Chaco Canyon were
carefully planned in their totality
prior to any work, suggesting they had a
functional use. Constructions on some of
these enigmatic buildings spans decades
and likely even centuries.
The Chacoans quarried sandstone and
transported timber from great distances
[music] to build their structures. Walls
were tapered within the structure to
distribute the crushing weight above
evenly, and sandstone walls were roofed
with pine beams, saplings, brush, and
earth.
Within the rooms were connected with
well-constructed doors, [music] often
taking a T-shape, which were likely
designed to prevent the entry of cold
winds and provide privacy within the
communal living spaces.
At the heart of the canyon, almost dead
in the center, lies the most imposing
and greatest house of them all, Pueblo
Bonito, meaning beautiful town. This
impressive building would have towered
over the landscape, reaching over five
stories tall. Within the ruins are the
remains of a labyrinth of corridors,
passageways, and as many as 600 rooms,
including kivas, terraces, and even
unusual sections that appear to have no
way in or out. Archaeologists have spent
decades meticulously examining the
remains of sites in this enigmatic
[music] region and have come to several
shocking conclusions that showcase just
how advanced the ancient Puebloans were.
The Chacoans constructed a vast network
of [music] roads that connected Pueblo
Bonito with many of the other great
houses and [music] an intricate water
control system provided clean water to
the settlements. By 1050, Chaco had not
just become the ceremonial,
administrative, and economic [music]
center of the San Juan Basin, but its
influence had extended far beyond. Yet,
the true purpose of many of these great
homes remains somewhat a mystery.
Leading theories suggest the buildings
were not traditional farming villages
occupied by large populations as there
is simply no evidence to suggest this.
Instead, they had a religious or
ceremonial function serving as
impressive examples of public
architecture used periodically during
ceremony, commerce, and trading when
temporary populations came to the canyon
for these events. But, what's even more
remarkable is the apparent astrological
alignments embedded into the layout of
the great homes. To modern researchers,
the Chacoans are renowned for their
astronomy and artistic achievements. And
many Chacoan buildings were purposefully
aligned to capture the solar and lunar
cycles. Astronomical knowledge and
expression appear to have formed a
unifying cosmology for the Chacoan
people across the vast region of their
culture. As researchers continue to
study the ruins of Chaco Canyon, many
have suggested this great social
experiment may have been the center of a
pilgrimage in which people arrived from
all directions. It was a sacred place
[music] that the Pueblo descendants
themselves claimed was a unique
gathering place where [music] many
people and clans converged to share
their ceremonies, traditions, and
knowledge. [music]
Taking this into consideration, it makes
sense that most of the buildings have
kivas or ceremonial spaces, [music]
which are considered spiritual and
political spaces even today by the Hopi
tribe. Chaco Canyon remains somewhat of
a puzzle to modern researchers.
Was it simply a trading hub in which
distinct groups could acquire macaws,
copper belts, shells, and other
commodities from distant lands? Did they
offer food and resources to growing
populations who were faced with a
climate disaster, possibly a prolonged
drought or other environmental
challenges? Or was it a remarkable
gathering place in [music] which ancient
Puebloans shared religious and political
ideas, including an understanding of the
stars? It's possible we may never get
the full picture. By the 12th century, a
decline in new construction was evident
at Chaco, and its role as a regional
center had diminished.
>> [music]
>> In time, Native American groups shifted
away from this once bustling region,
migrating to new lands.
Today, their descendants are the
southwestern groups such as Hopi, Zuni,
Acoma, and Laguna, all of whom look upon
the ruins of Chaco as an integral stop
along their clans' sacred migration
paths. [music] And it continues to be a
spiritual place both honored and
respected. Roaming the land for
sustenance, [music]
a nomadic life on the open plains.
Spending your time huddled in the
carefully constructed homes that adorns
the heights of sprawling mounds wasn't
necessarily a prerequisite for life in
the ancient Americas. For some tribes, a
nomadic existence migrating with the
seasons remained their way of life.
Like their ancestors, they sought to
follow seasons and migrated along with
animals such as the buffalo.
To them, this migration was not merely a
physical task, [music] but represented a
kind of spiritual journey. Hence,
joining the buffalo as they moved
[music] across the plains was highly
sacred.
The Navajo and Apache tribes were
nomadic and relied on hunting and
gathering.
Because they were constantly moving,
their homes were less permanent [music]
than the mounds builders and Puebloans.
The Navajo referred to themselves as the
Dine, which translates to the people.
It's thought they were part of a
southward migration from Alaska
following an enormous volcanic eruption
in the Saint Elias Mountains around 803
AD.
They later settled in around the Four
Corners region, primarily continuing on
with a life of hunting and gathering.
They constructed temporary dwellings
called hogans from a combination of mud
and bark. Over time, their interactions
with the Pueblo tribe taught [music]
them how to farm and cultivate land.
But even with these new found skills,
they continued to move seasonally with
their extended kinship groups practicing
agriculture wherever they settled.
Like the Navajo, the Lakota, who
originated in the regions of Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Iowa, and Eastern [music]
North Dakota, preferred a life of
nomadism.
They followed bison herds across their
vast territories, hunting the large
animals for food, clothing, and other
materials. During their extension
migrations, they looked to the sun and
stars for guidance, showcasing the
importance of astrology to their
culture.
When they temporarily settled in a
region, the women of the tribe were in
charge of setting up their
accommodation, which consisted of
portable teepees made using the hide of
buffalo. These conical tents were made
by stretching skins over a wood frame
and could be assembled quickly, making
them the perfect choice for a migrating
tribe.
Lakota legends speak of an origin close
to the Great Lakes. Here, the tribes of
the Dakota lived for many moons around
the banks of Lake Superior. In this
forest environment, they sustained their
growing numbers by hunting, fishing, and
gathering wild rice. They also grew some
corn, but their locale was near the
limit of where corn could be grown.
The nomadic lifestyle of many Native
American groups likely contributed to
the development of long-distance trade
routes that crossed what are now modern
national borders. Archaeologists have
noted the existence of not only a
cultural exchange between the Puebloan
tribes of American Southwest and
Mesoamerica, but the trading of goods
such as metal items, mica mirror, and
even cacao, all of which found their way
to the Southwest. In return, the latter
is thought to have supplied Mesoamerica
with goods like turquoise, pottery,
[music] and food items. Decline of
prosperous North American cultures. Crop
[music] failures, internal warfare, and
colonization. The cultural innovation
and technological advancements that
allowed Native Americans to become
masters of the environment were not
enough to preserve their great cities
[music] indefinitely. While some fled in
search of new land and others fled
tribal wars, little did they know at the
time [music] an unforeseen threat was on
the horizon. One that would forever
change the course of history in the
Americas. Just as the Ancestral
Puebloans of Chaco Canyon had slowly
begun to abandon the settlements by the
12th century, the Mississippian culture
of Cahokia Mounds had started to decline
the following century before being
abandoned by the 1400s.
But just around this time, a new
superpower began to rise in Central
America. A culture that would grow into
one of the largest and most powerful
civilizations the Americas would ever
see. This was the rise of the Mexica,
better known today as the Aztecs.
While the origins of these prominent
people are somewhat obscure, it is
thought they initially emerged as a
collection of nomadic hunter-gatherers
in northern Mexico before migrating to
the area around modern Mexico City.
The Aztecs believed they came from the
mythical land of Aztlan, which means
white land in the Aztec language of
Nahuatl. They were guided by their
patron war god Huitzilopochtli, which
means left-handed hummingbird or
hummingbird from the south.
They settled on an island in Lake
Texcoco [music]
after seeing an eagle holding a
rattlesnake in its talons, fulfilling a
prophecy that told them to found their
city there.
They built their famous capital city
Tenochtitlan on an artificial island in
Lake Texcoco, the remains of which can
still be seen today. The Aztecs are
known for their many accomplishments. To
feed a growing population, they created
beautiful and innovative floating
gardens or chinampas to create more land
for farming.
These gardens were very productive,
producing up to four crops per year to
support the growth of these crops. They
implemented a complex system of
aqueducts, which allowed an unlimited
supply of fresh water for irrigation.
Likely building on the work of older
cultures such as the Olmec and Maya,
they created their own intricate
calendrical and numerical system,
[music] which allows them to carefully
track the stars and recorded historical
and mythological events. They even had a
complex system of written laws and a
code on how members of society should
act. But they also had a darker side
[music] that sought to appease their
gods. The Aztecs are known for their
practicing of large-scale human
sacrifice.
They offered victims to Huitzilopochtli,
the sun god, believing it was necessary
to maintain the [music] cosmic balance
and prevent the world from ending. This
practice is well documented by both
Aztec accounts.
But as the Aztecs rose to prominence in
Central America, many former grand
settlements in the north were ultimately
left to fall into ruin. With researchers
claiming tribes and groups were forced
to move on for a number of reasons.
Over-farming resulted in a land drained
of nutrients, meaning towns were forced
to relocate.
Tribal warfare also increased and the
evolution of a societal structure led to
an increasingly political world in which
some people in the community controlled
more power and wealth than others.
Drought, warfare, social unrest, and
other such factors likely resulted in
the decline of the Mississippian
culture. However, one major incident
stands above all else and ultimately
played a role in the demise of culture.
The arrival of Europeans in the
Americas. For these so-called
conquistadors, conquest was nothing more
than a business enterprise. The
possibility of acquiring gold drew more
Spaniards like Hernán Cortés to the
continents, and he engaged in the first
major conquest of Mexico in 1519,
going on to topple the mighty Aztec
Empire there in 1521.
Explorers embarked on vast journeys both
north and south of Mexico, spending time
with many of the native peoples. One
such adventurer was Hernando de Soto.
During the middle of the 16th century,
this Spaniard lived with and learned
from the remaining Mississippian tribes.
A minor cultural exchange occurred in
the beginning. Some groups adopted
European horses and sought to live a
more nomadic life. By the time more
documentary accounts were being written,
the Mississippian way of life had
changed [music] drastically. While
groups like the Cherokee preserved oral
traditions tied to their mound-building
heritage, others, after migrating far
from their ancestral lands, eventually
lost knowledge of the builders behind
the mounds that dotted the landscape. In
the early years, these native groups
were largely unaffected by Europeans,
but soon everything will change.